(air gapped): add docs for air gapped env (#203)
cozystack/website: content/en/docs/operations/talos/configuration/air-gapped.md

---

> title: Bootstrap a Talos Linux cluster for air-gapped environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Bootstrap a Talos Linux cluster for an air-gapped environment
linkTitle: Air Gap
```

linkTitle: air-gapped

> description: "Bootstrap a Talos Linux cluster for Cozystack with air-gapped"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Bootstrap a Talos Linux cluster for Cozystack with an air-gapped environment"
```

weight: 20
aliases:
  - /docs/talos/configuration/air-gapped
---

# Air-Gapped Installation of Talos Linux Cluster

> This guide outlines the steps to bootstrap a Cozystackin an **air-gapped environment**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide outlines the steps to bootstrap a Cozystack in an **air-gapped environment**.
```

> **Air-gapped** means the cluster does **not** have direct access to the internet. All necessary resources (images, metadata, etc.) must be made available inside the local network.

Reviewer: using "private network", not "local", because it emphasizes that it's isolated, and later you're using this word exactly

---
## Configure nodes
{{% alert color="warning" %}}

> For talm installation make this changes in `./templates/_helpers.tpl` before make template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Talm installation, make these changes in `./templates/_helpers.tpl` before making the template.
```

Reviewer: @klinch0 or is it the `make template` command?

{{% /alert %}}

### Configure NTP Servers

Accurate time synchronization is critical for the cluster. In your Talos machine configuration, set **local NTP servers** that are accessible inside your private network.

```yaml
machine:
  time:
    servers:
      - 192.168.0.4
      - 10.10.0.5
```
Ensure the specified NTP servers are reachable from first node.

### Configure Container Registry Mirrors

> Since the cluster cannot access public container registries, configure local registry mirrors for essential upstream registries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the cluster cannot access public container registries, it needs to use their local mirrors.
Creating such mirrors is out of the scope of this guide.
```

> Update your machine configuration with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update your machine configuration in the following way:
```

```yaml
machine:
  registries:
    mirrors:
      docker.io:
        endpoints:
          - http://10.0.0.1:8082
      ghcr.io:
        endpoints:
          - http://10.0.0.1:8083
      gcr.io:
        endpoints:
          - http://10.0.0.1:8084
      registry.k8s.io:
        endpoints:
          - http://10.0.0.1:8085
      quay.io:
        endpoints:
          - http://10.0.0.1:8086
    config:
      "10.0.0.1:8082":
        insecure: true
        auth:
          username: myuser
          password: mypass
```

> Where `config.[0].insecure` and `config.[0].auth` is example, make it if you needed.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the values for `config.[0].insecure` and `config.[0].auth` are given as examples.
Put the real values instead.
```

> Make sure your local registry proxies mirror all required images for Talos and Kubernetes components.

Reviewer: How do I know which images are required?

> ### Add certificate to nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add a CA certificate to the nodes
```

Add to your nodes config:

```yaml
# talm: nodes=["10.10.10.10"], endpoints=["10.10.10.10"], templates=["templates/controlplane.yaml"]

> # THIS FILE IS AUTOGENERATED. PREFER TEMPLATE EDITS OVER MANUAL ONES.

Reviewer: It clearly says the file is autogenerated. How do we edit the template?
